You've been invited to help us with open sourcing efforts around GemFire.
Great! There's not too many rules to follow, expect the following things
that you *absolutely* need to keep in mind:

# Make sure to subscribe to the gemfire-asf ML https://groups.google.com/a/pivotal.io/forum/#!forum/gemfire-asf  This is our official channel for communication.

# The GH repo that you all have access now consists of two top level folders: open and closed. Please make sure that bits under closed NEVER leak outside of Pivotal. These are the bits we are currently NOT going to open source.

# The GemFire team is busily working on clean separation between open and closed. There will be ongoing movement of functionality between the two. Keep track of it.

# Start playing with the code available to you on GH, but please keep in mind that:
  * It’s a temporary repo for legal review that will be deleted by the end of March.
  * It contains code and history that we don’t intend to make public and should not be exposed outside of pivotal.
  * It’s essentially a mirror of our internal dev branch where we’re making pretty extensive build changes on a daily basis.Expect things to be broken and updated irregularly.
  * One thing to note is that there are two separate builds: open/ vs. closed/ even though the closed side includes subprojects from the open/ dirs.  Eventually (soon) these will be split into two separate repos entirely.
  * Most of the tests are located in closed/gemfire-tests.  These will be  moved into gemfire-core over time.  We will split out and open source the hydra framework but leave the regression tests themselves private. The *-assembly subprojects assemble the product tree and tarballs.
# Don't hesitate to provide feedback on gemfire-asf or send PRs!
# And finally, don't hesitate to record any notes, etc. on the wiki https://github.com/gemfire/apache-gemfire-staging/wiki This will become the starting point for our Apache documentation/wiki.